README.rst, before:

|repostatus| |ci-status| |coverage| |pyversions| |conda| |license|

.. |repostatus| image:: https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg
    :target: https://www.repostatus.org/#active
    :alt: Project Status: Active — The project has reached a stable, usable
          state and is being actively developed.

.. |ci-status| image:: https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: CI Status

.. |coverage| image:: https://codecov.io/gh/jwodder/versioningit/branch/master/graph/badge.svg
    :target: https://codecov.io/gh/jwodder/versioningit

.. |pyversions| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/versioningit.svg
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/versioningit/

.. |conda| image:: https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/conda-forge/versioningit.svg
    :target: https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/versioningit
    :alt: Conda Version

.. |license| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/license/jwodder/versioningit.svg
    :target: https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
    :alt: MIT License

`GitHub <https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit>`_
| `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/versioningit/>`_
| `Documentation <https://versioningit.readthedocs.io>`_
| `Issues <https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit/issues>`_
| `Changelog <https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md>`_

``versioningit`` — *Versioning It with your Version In Git*

``versioningit`` is yet another Python packaging plugin for automatically
determining your package's version based on your version control repository's
tags.  Unlike others, it allows easy customization of the version format and
even lets you easily override the separate functions used for version
extraction & calculation.

**Features:**

- Works with both setuptools and Hatch_

  .. _hatch: https://hatch.pypa.io

- Installed & configured through :pep:`518`'s ``pyproject.toml``

- Supports Git, modern Git archives, and Mercurial

- Formatting of the final version uses format template strings, with fields for
  basic VCS information and separate template strings for distanced vs. dirty
  vs. distanced-and-dirty repository states

- Can optionally write the final version and other details to a file for
  loading at runtime

- Provides custom hooks for inserting the final version and other details into
  a source file at build time

- The individual methods for VCS querying, tag-to-version calculation, version
  bumping, version formatting, and writing the version to a file can all be
  customized using either functions defined alongside one's project code or via
  publicly-distributed entry points

- Can alternatively be used as a library for use in ``setup.py`` or the like,
  in case you don't want to or can't configure it via ``pyproject.toml``

- The only thing it does is calculate your version and optionally write it to a
  file; there's no overriding of your sdist contents based on what's in your
  Git repository, especially not without a way to turn it off, because that
  would just be rude.


Installation & Setup
====================
``versioningit`` requires Python 3.8 or higher.  Just use `pip
<https://pip.pypa.io>`_ for Python 3 (You have pip, right?) to install
``versioningit`` and its dependencies::

    python3 -m pip install versioningit

However, usually you won't need to install ``versioningit`` in your environment
directly.  Instead, you specify it in your project's ``pyproject.toml`` file in
the ``build-system.requires`` key, like so:

.. code:: toml

    # If using Setuptools:
    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "setuptools",
        "versioningit",
    ]
    build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

    # If using Hatch:
    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "hatchling",
        "versioningit",
    ]
    build-backend = "hatchling.build"

    # This setting is also required if you're using Hatch:
    [tool.hatch.version]
    source = "versioningit"

Then, you configure ``versioningit`` by adding a ``[tool.versioningit]`` table
to your ``pyproject.toml``.  See `the documentation`__ for details, but you
can get up & running with just the minimal configuration, an empty table:

__ https://versioningit.readthedocs.io/en/stable/configuration.html

.. code:: toml

    [tool.versioningit]

``versioningit`` eliminates the need to list an explicit version in
``setup.py``, ``setup.cfg``, or ``pyproject.toml`` (and any explicit version
you do list will be ignored when using ``versioningit``), so you should remove
any such settings in order to reduce confusion.

**Note:** If you're specifying your project metadata via a ``[project]`` table
in ``pyproject.toml``, you need to set ``project.dynamic = ["version"]`` in
order for ``versioningit`` to work.

Once you have a ``[tool.versioningit]`` table in your ``pyproject.toml`` — and
once your repository has at least one tag — building your project with build_
or similar will result in your project's version automatically being set based
on the latest tag in your Git repository.  You can test your configuration and
see what the resulting version will be using the ``versioningit`` command (`see
the documentation`__).

.. _build: https://github.com/pypa/build

__ https://versioningit.readthedocs.io/en/stable/command.html


Example Configurations
======================

One of ``versioningit``'s biggest strengths is its ability to configure the
version format using placeholder strings.  The default format configuration
looks like this:

.. code:: toml

    [tool.versioningit.format]
    # Format used when there have been commits since the most recent tag:
    distance = "{base_version}.post{distance}+{vcs}{rev}"
    # Example formatted version: 1.2.3.post42+ge174a1f

    # Format used when there are uncommitted changes:
    dirty = "{base_version}+d{build_date:%Y%m%d}"
    # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+d20230922

    # Format used when there are both commits and uncommitted changes:
    distance-dirty = "{base_version}.post{distance}+{vcs}{rev}.d{build_date:%Y%m%d}"
    # Example formatted version: 1.2.3.post42+ge174a1f.d20230922

Other format configurations of interest include:

- The default format used by setuptools_scm_:

  .. code:: toml

      [tool.versioningit.next-version]
      method = "smallest"

      [tool.versioningit.format]
      distance = "{next_version}.dev{distance}+{vcs}{rev}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.4.dev42+ge174a1f

      dirty = "{base_version}+d{build_date:%Y%m%d}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+d20230922

      distance-dirty = "{next_version}.dev{distance}+{vcs}{rev}.d{build_date:%Y%m%d}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.4.dev42+ge174a1f.d20230922

- The format used by versioneer_:

  .. code:: toml

      [tool.versioningit.format]
      distance = "{base_version}+{distance}.{vcs}{rev}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+42.ge174a1f

      dirty = "{base_version}+{distance}.{vcs}{rev}.dirty"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+42.ge174a1f.dirty

      distance-dirty = "{base_version}+{distance}.{vcs}{rev}.dirty"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+42.ge174a1f.dirty

- The format used by vcversioner_:

  .. code:: toml

      [tool.versioningit.format]
      distance = "{base_version}.post{distance}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3.post42

      dirty = "{base_version}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3

      distance-dirty = "{base_version}.post{distance}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3.post42

.. _setuptools_scm: https://github.com/pypa/setuptools_scm
.. _versioneer: https://github.com/python-versioneer/python-versioneer
.. _vcversioner: https://github.com/habnabit/vcversioner

Commit message:

Add support of alternative config file versioningit.toml

README.rst, after:

|repostatus| |ci-status| |coverage| |pyversions| |conda| |license|

.. |repostatus| image:: https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg
    :target: https://www.repostatus.org/#active
    :alt: Project Status: Active — The project has reached a stable, usable
          state and is being actively developed.

.. |ci-status| image:: https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: CI Status

.. |coverage| image:: https://codecov.io/gh/jwodder/versioningit/branch/master/graph/badge.svg
    :target: https://codecov.io/gh/jwodder/versioningit

.. |pyversions| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/versioningit.svg
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/versioningit/

.. |conda| image:: https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/conda-forge/versioningit.svg
    :target: https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/versioningit
    :alt: Conda Version

.. |license| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/license/jwodder/versioningit.svg
    :target: https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
    :alt: MIT License

`GitHub <https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit>`_
| `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/versioningit/>`_
| `Documentation <https://versioningit.readthedocs.io>`_
| `Issues <https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit/issues>`_
| `Changelog <https://github.com/jwodder/versioningit/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md>`_

``versioningit`` — *Versioning It with your Version In Git*

``versioningit`` is yet another Python packaging plugin for automatically
determining your package's version based on your version control repository's
tags.  Unlike others, it allows easy customization of the version format and
even lets you easily override the separate functions used for version
extraction & calculation.

**Features:**

- Works with both setuptools and Hatch_

  .. _hatch: https://hatch.pypa.io

- Installed & configured through :pep:`518`'s ``pyproject.toml``

- Supports Git, modern Git archives, and Mercurial

- Formatting of the final version uses format template strings, with fields for
  basic VCS information and separate template strings for distanced vs. dirty
  vs. distanced-and-dirty repository states

- Can optionally write the final version and other details to a file for
  loading at runtime

- Provides custom hooks for inserting the final version and other details into
  a source file at build time

- The individual methods for VCS querying, tag-to-version calculation, version
  bumping, version formatting, and writing the version to a file can all be
  customized using either functions defined alongside one's project code or via
  publicly-distributed entry points

- Can alternatively be used as a library for use in ``setup.py`` or the like,
  in case you don't want to or can't configure it via ``pyproject.toml``

- Can alternatively place your configuration in ``versioningit.toml``
  for non-Python projects

- The only thing it does is calculate your version and optionally write it to a
  file; there's no overriding of your sdist contents based on what's in your
  Git repository, especially not without a way to turn it off, because that
  would just be rude.


Installation & Setup
====================
``versioningit`` requires Python 3.8 or higher.  Just use `pip
<https://pip.pypa.io>`_ for Python 3 (You have pip, right?) to install
``versioningit`` and its dependencies::

    python3 -m pip install versioningit

However, usually you won't need to install ``versioningit`` in your environment
directly.  Instead, you specify it in your project's ``pyproject.toml`` file in
the ``build-system.requires`` key, like so:

.. code:: toml

    # If using Setuptools:
    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "setuptools",
        "versioningit",
    ]
    build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

    # If using Hatch:
    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "hatchling",
        "versioningit",
    ]
    build-backend = "hatchling.build"

    # This setting is also required if you're using Hatch:
    [tool.hatch.version]
    source = "versioningit"

Then, you configure ``versioningit`` by adding a ``[tool.versioningit]`` table
to your ``pyproject.toml``.  See `the documentation`__ for details, but you
can get up & running with just the minimal configuration, an empty table:

__ https://versioningit.readthedocs.io/en/stable/configuration.html

.. code:: toml

    [tool.versioningit]

``versioningit`` eliminates the need to list an explicit version in
``setup.py``, ``setup.cfg``, or ``pyproject.toml`` (and any explicit version
you do list will be ignored when using ``versioningit``), so you should remove
any such settings in order to reduce confusion.

**Note:** If you're specifying your project metadata via a ``[project]`` table
in ``pyproject.toml``, you need to set ``project.dynamic = ["version"]`` in
order for ``versioningit`` to work.

Once you have a ``[tool.versioningit]`` table in your ``pyproject.toml`` — and
once your repository has at least one tag — building your project with build_
or similar will result in your project's version automatically being set based
on the latest tag in your Git repository.  You can test your configuration and
see what the resulting version will be using the ``versioningit`` command (`see
the documentation`__).

.. _build: https://github.com/pypa/build

__ https://versioningit.readthedocs.io/en/stable/command.html


Example Configurations
======================

One of ``versioningit``'s biggest strengths is its ability to configure the
version format using placeholder strings.  The default format configuration
looks like this:

.. code:: toml

    [tool.versioningit.format]
    # Format used when there have been commits since the most recent tag:
    distance = "{base_version}.post{distance}+{vcs}{rev}"
    # Example formatted version: 1.2.3.post42+ge174a1f

    # Format used when there are uncommitted changes:
    dirty = "{base_version}+d{build_date:%Y%m%d}"
    # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+d20230922

    # Format used when there are both commits and uncommitted changes:
    distance-dirty = "{base_version}.post{distance}+{vcs}{rev}.d{build_date:%Y%m%d}"
    # Example formatted version: 1.2.3.post42+ge174a1f.d20230922

Other format configurations of interest include:

- The default format used by setuptools_scm_:

  .. code:: toml

      [tool.versioningit.next-version]
      method = "smallest"

      [tool.versioningit.format]
      distance = "{next_version}.dev{distance}+{vcs}{rev}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.4.dev42+ge174a1f

      dirty = "{base_version}+d{build_date:%Y%m%d}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+d20230922

      distance-dirty = "{next_version}.dev{distance}+{vcs}{rev}.d{build_date:%Y%m%d}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.4.dev42+ge174a1f.d20230922

- The format used by versioneer_:

  .. code:: toml

      [tool.versioningit.format]
      distance = "{base_version}+{distance}.{vcs}{rev}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+42.ge174a1f

      dirty = "{base_version}+{distance}.{vcs}{rev}.dirty"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+42.ge174a1f.dirty

      distance-dirty = "{base_version}+{distance}.{vcs}{rev}.dirty"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3+42.ge174a1f.dirty

- The format used by vcversioner_:

  .. code:: toml

      [tool.versioningit.format]
      distance = "{base_version}.post{distance}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3.post42

      dirty = "{base_version}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3

      distance-dirty = "{base_version}.post{distance}"
      # Example formatted version: 1.2.3.post42

.. _setuptools_scm: https://github.com/pypa/setuptools_scm
.. _versioneer: https://github.com/python-versioneer/python-versioneer
.. _vcversioner: https://github.com/habnabit/vcversioner
