How it Works
============

``versioningit`` divides its operation into seven :dfn:`steps`: ``vcs``,
``tag2version``, ``next-version``, ``format``, ``template-fields``, ``write``,
and ``onbuild``.  The first four steps make up the actual version calculation,
while the rest normally only happen while building with setuptools or Hatch.

Version Calculation
-------------------

The version for a given project is determined as follows:

- ``vcs`` step: The version control system specified in the project's
  ``versioningit`` configuration is queried for information about the project's
  working directory: the most recent tag, the number of commits since that tag,
  whether there are any uncommitted changes, and other data points.

- ``tag2version`` step: A version is extracted from the tag returned by the
  ``vcs`` step

- ``next-version`` step: The next version after the most recent version is
  calculated

- If there have been no commits or uncommitted changes since the most recent
  tag, the version returned by the ``tag2version`` step is used as the project
  version.  Otherwise:

  - ``format`` step: The results of the preceding steps are combined to produce
    a final project version.

- ``template-fields`` step: Values from the preceding steps are used to
  calculate a set of template fields for use by the ``write`` and/or
  ``onbuild`` steps


Build Integration
-----------------

Setting the Version
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``versioningit`` registers plugins with both setuptools and Hatch that cause it
to be run whenever one of those backends computes the metadata for a project in
an environment in which ``versioningit`` is installed.  If the project in
question has a :file:`versioningit.toml` or :file:`pyproject.toml` file with a
``[tool.versioningit]`` table (or, for Hatch only, a ``[tool.hatch.version]``
table containing more than just a ``source`` key), then ``versioningit``
performs the version calculations described above and sets the project's
version to the final value.  (If a version cannot be determined because the
project is not in a repository or repository archive, then ``versioningit``
will assume the project is an unpacked sdist and will look for a
:file:`PKG-INFO` file to fetch the version from instead.)  If the configuration
table contains a ``write`` subtable, then the ``write`` step will also be run
at this time; the default ``write`` method creates a file at a specified path
containing the project's version.

``onbuild`` Step
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a project is built that uses ``versioningit``'s custom setuptools commands
or Hatch build hook, the ``onbuild`` step becomes added to the build process.
The default ``onbuild`` method updates one of the files in the built
distribution to contain the project version while leaving the source files in
the actual project alone.  See ":ref:`onbuild`" for more information.
